great
fantastic all right so I don't know what
Luli has told you so far but um so I uh
my name is Visa I'm from Singapore
and uh my friends have been trying to
get me to read your book for for like a
year now and I finally I got a copy in
the mail like three days ago and I read
it all in all at once a couple of days
ago I loved it cool
and um there's so much I have actually I
have actually I have so many things to
talk to you about that I have to
prioritize and
um I think what's most interesting is
that we have really different
backgrounds so I mean I've read up as
much as I could about all your
interviews and stuff and you know it's
uh I I really appreciate your your
scientific background and theoretical
physics and that stuff that I'm a
curious lay person about but I don't
have a strong foundation in so when I'm
reading it it makes sense to me but you
know I don't have the kind of
uh deep
contexts the really fully appreciate it
but
I mean so okay what I wanted to talk to
you about is
um about optimism
and I find that and I think that I found
quite amusing is throughout your book
you use the word um parochial a lot
yes right which is which is uh I I enjoy
that and uh I was hoping to
dig into that with you a little bit so I
mean for some more context so what
people know me on Twitter for and on the
internet for is just kind of a
um I'm known as as the guy who tries to
cultivate the sort of um digital
intellectual Coffee House sort of space
where I invite friends from all over the
world different perspectives different
interests and I I think we have similar
interests in that I want to help
accelerate progress in every sense right
and I'm reading your book I find myself
thinking yes I want more good
explanations I want more conjectures I
want to help Foster a culture of
criticism and
um yeah I just would like to hear from
you about your experiences doing that
you know kind of like um
uh talking to people about these ideas
oh I mean okay I guess what I would be
most curious about is
um how did you how how do you think
about let's say parochialism like where
where what is your relationship with
that what is how is that is it a very
deliberate choice that word or you know
um okay so uh parochialism I've I've
recently discovered that
that the word parochialism doesn't
really exist in languages other than
English
uh yeah you know it's originally meant
um having something to do with the
parish or with the with the local uh
religious authorities as opposed to the
central religious authorities so that
that's what it originally meant
interesting and
um in English it has come and that word
exists in many languages
right
um but in English it has come to have
and is much more often now used in a in
a figurative sense to mean having too
narrow a horizon especially having too
narrow an intellectual Horizon
mm-hmm
um and uh I should say that that having
a broad Horizon
is not a virtue in itself it all depends
on the problem situation what I mean by
parochial is
if it is is a point of view or a way of
thinking that is more narrow than the
problem uh dictates right and one of my
mottos is all problems are parochial
hmm some solutions are Universal
interesting
that's true yeah
so uh so that I don't know if that's
what you wanted but that that's yeah
that's how you know I came to use
parochial a lot I love it um I really
like that you just said
um that you know having a broader
Horizon is not necessarily optimal in a
sense right because I've encountered
absolutely I've encountered people over
the years who they almost seem to
sometimes you know like so they they
begin with the assumption that bigger
and broader is better and
which again like I think you pointed out
it's it's not it's generally kind of
used
often good but like I found it I found
people sometimes using it almost as a
distraction from dealing with some
particular problem that they want that
they would need solving and then it's
kind of like yes we have some problem
that we need to solve but because it's
challenging or difficult or or whatever
it becomes tempting to to try and kind
of frame the problem in a much more
Broad and vague way such that it can't
really be solved maybe but like um it's
a it's it's really cool that you
mentioned that because I think
it's been challenging to find an
intuitive way to convey that to people
that sometimes
like so the general case seems to be
that people tend to frame their problems
too narrowly but there's also this kind
of minority of people who do the
opposite and they they instead of
addressing the challenges in front of
them they kind of just get distracted
from it and seek broader and broader
perspectives
yes I mean it it leads it leads to
Infinity eventually if if you're like if
you're writing computer program and you
want a function to do so and so and you
you think oh well maybe it would be
better if I made it more General so I'll
put another parameter in the in function
and then you say well I could make it
even more General then I'll abstract
over something or other and then then
I'll go into tools to help me abstract
and so on yes eventually the thing you
actually wanted to do is add two numbers
together yeah that's true uh and another
thing that I wanted to discuss with you
was uh your chapter on creativity so I
consider myself
um very much a fan of creativity and and
I love that you also seem the
um appreciate that you know it's not
just an artsy thing it's like like so
it's like science is progressed by
creative conjectures and and having
creative ideas and yeah I want to see
more of that and I find and even very
recently I've gotten into kind of um
kind of boring and frustrating
um disagreements about you know kind of
the building blocks of creativity so
some people feel that so one of my riffs
is that
um you know to some degree all
creativity is is a remix or like a you
know like like just rearranging what you
have but also you ask new questions that
you couldn't conceive of before right
yes it could be um a remix with
variations yes exactly right and
everything is based on existing things
but but mixing around and varying them
then to fit the problem correct yeah
yeah and it's again I run into a similar
problem again where
if the other person in the conversation
or you know if it's uh if we are
workshopping trying to solve a problem
together and someone gets kind of
fixated on
um what a creative solution would look
like it's I I think it's one of those
traps where people try too hard the the
stick to a certain
um
frame or a certain
um how would you say like a like an
encapsulation of of the challenge ahead
of them and I sense that you would have
had experience
um persuading people to
adjust the uh their point of view to be
more constructive
have you I'm projecting like maybe I I
generally speaking I I don't want to
like
um I I don't want to influence people I
I right I I don't want to save the world
uh or or save people I I just have some
ideas right some guesses about how the
world Works how thinking Works how
physics works and so on and in some
cases I've thought about it a lot and
and I think that some existing ideas
about this are wrong and so I'm like
um but that's wrong because so-and-so
right but but then I the object of a
conversation I think it is it's not
primarily to persuade people it's to
exchange ideas yes uh and not even
necessary I mean so
um persuading people is nice learning
things from other people is nice yes
that does not exhaust the possibilities
that's not even the main purpose to me
of a conversation right the the main
purpose is just the the fun of
exchanging ideas and yeah you could call
that learning something but it's not
it's not necessarily you know what did
you learn from this conversation right
it's not that kind of learning yes it's
playful right
yes and uh and yeah so what what so even
now talking about this with you like um
if the the perspective that you hold it
feels unusual it feels like um you know
it's refreshing to to talk with someone
who kind of
um you know so like you said I just have
ideas I'm not trying to change the world
or trying to you know like not hankering
for of an outcome specifically and I
find that that's uh you know I wish that
were more common and I find that um it's
not as common as I wish it were so in
the I think in the past I used to
approach a lot of conversations with oh
why don't you see my point of view or
why don't you do that and I think over
time I have come to all right you know
if if where we are in this conversation
it's not moving in a it's not it's not
we're not having fun you know it's not
enjoyable I should just find someone
else and kind of keep looking for new
people to play with basically yes and um
I'm curious about how
you know so do you share that assessment
that it's not very common and do you
have like a hypothesis for why it's not
that common I mean you've written about
this I'd love to hear it from you
I I think it's it's not very common and
and I think the reason is like like all
or nearly all
um
uh errors to do with knowledge it comes
from
um aspects of wrong epistemology or
wrong philosophy of knowledge that are
embedded in culture in language and
everything so that we we we will take
them for granted unless we really think
about them and uh you know that this is
what Carl Poppa did for us right he
realized that that uh there there are
various things that are deeply wrong
with the prevailing theory of knowledge
so for example
um one thing that that would that would
already do what you're talking about
that would already make people make that
mistake is what Papa calls the bucket
theory of the Mind the bucket list of
knowledge right right which is yeah
knowledge is a kind of fluid which one
can transfer from one person to another
and then
if you think of knowledge that way
it it perverts everything it you you you
you
automatically start thinking of a
conversation as being
a task of transferring something from
your mind into the other person's mind
or maybe vice versa but that's all it
can be and if it goes wrong it's because
either the the the the fluid was
polluted the knowledge fluid was was
polluted with with bad stuff or because
the person receiving it is too stubborn
to open their mind to it right and this
whole conception
completely
uh uh defines a way the fact that
um minds are creative
and critical so once you've removed so
this concept of knowledge as a fluid
removes the idea that that that uh minds
are both creative and critical when
you've removed those two things you
could be trying to do something or not
and that's it you can't you can't create
yeah that's a it's a and it's a very
zero-sum
kind of uh yes mindset and yeah so when
I was when I was reading your book I was
struck by how you know um at one point
you even just casually mentioned like
something as simple as a nuclear fusion
reactor that we our current knowledge
doesn't allow us to do and let me that
was just kind of a throwaway point and
reading that I found myself thinking yes
like with that like why do I not go
about my day thinking nuclear fusion
reactors are possible like it just it
doesn't even occur to me to think that
and uh you know it's it's such a
it's such a
it's it's a trip to realize that I have
already been kind of inhabiting these
like limited spaces in my in my mind
about what is possible and what is not
so it's an imagination deficit in a way
right like a
and and so yes
I sense that
um so again it's like what what we just
described which is most people kind of
uh not being very creative in their
conversations or thinking or not being
very imaginative that's kind of it's a
it's it's something to be a little bit
sad about maybe or something to be just
kind of slightly disappointed by but at
the same time what you pointed out is
that of the vast majority of human
history it seems like most people were
not capable of that probably or they
were a funnel their creativity I love
yeah they were they were severely
disabled in that respect I mean never
completely All Humans always have been
creative and able to improve but you
know when you've when you've got uh the
weight of a static Society right uh
bearing down on you and and when you do
think of something you think you're the
only person in the world ever to think
that and therefore you must be wrong you
know whatever yeah uh then it's no
wonder that that very little progress
was made but still even in such
societies right in the past where where
they had you know inconceivably little
um
uh
little infrastructure I mean cultural
infrastructure to to rest on people
still did make progress right
um you know but somebody invented fire
wasn't even a human it was it was a
previous species right some previous
people we don't know what species and
right somebody invented fire which takes
takes a hell of a lot of doing yeah
um to be able to think very abstractly
right there's this terrible joke that
goes something like um the person who
invented fire was probably burnt at the
stake for it
which is kind of a you know it's I think
that is like so well that's a joke I
think that's a general theme of I think
even with you know um Fritz Harbor right
with M like when he came up with uh
ammonia you simultaneously invent
fertilizer and Dynam like weapons right
chemicals yes and it's kind of a you
know as a as a scientist trying to
create more knowledge and and grappling
with the implications of you can't
entirely control how other people are
gonna use that knowledge right because
if they don't have the cultural what are
your thoughts about that about you know
kind of uh some people call it like info
hazards
yes I I think it's not at all
um unlikely that the person who invented
fire
um regretted it
um
they they were either you know I I don't
they probably wouldn't have invented
burning at the stake by then but but
they might have been killed for it and
there would have been a non-trivial
argument
for because that person would have had
to violate some tradition to do this yes
yes and uh the violating tradition would
have been dangerous right so it's like
you know uh one person decides to mess
around with uh it's thought that they
first fire was made by very varying a
spear hardening technique where you rub
the tip of the spear you know and right
somebody else might have might have
decided to to uh tame the local
saber-toothed tiger right and uh that
would have been a bad idea as we now
know but
they so or
and and fire is also dangerous right
it's not obvious that the first two or
three or ten uses of fire didn't do harm
right they might have yeah um
uh and
um so it's true of all knowledge all
creativity is dangerous yes all
knowledge is dangerous yes
um and
um
I mean it's it seems trite to say it but
staticity not creating knowledge right
is worse than dangerous it's suicidal
that's the only thing we could do that
is guaranteed to kill oh okay right yeah
because like the Easter Island problem
right like where yes it you you without
the culture of learning and solving new
problems eventually it's inevitable that
some problem will be insoluble and Crush
you basically yes yes yeah so it's it's
it's funny because I'm thinking now
about how you know so I've I've always
been
um kind of paying lip service to the
idea of creativity like just very very
superficially oh it's good to be
creative it's good to experiment and
have fun like in a very like I just
advocate for it because I like music and
art and all of those things but like I I
almost had the I had a moment where I
had to step back and think about it
where I realized that when you encourage
people to be creative you are in in like
two steps down the line you're
encouraging them to buy to do things
that maybe taboo to do things that maybe
yes culturally so you're like you said
it's dangerous so it's you're advocating
for people to do dangerous things and
again it's like that and and when I then
recoil a little bit at that
two is informed by this cultural
infrastructure of oh you know so like
danger bad right but danger danger bad
in some senses but without the ability
to do
solve problems that's bigger bad right
like what yeah so
it's a it's a it's an interesting
challenge so the the challenge as I see
it is how can we get better at teaching
the world I mean not necessarily you
know like like forcing people but like
demonstrating that
small danger in creativity is
good basically
right like it's a it's a challenge yes
one thing is that that um people should
be free to choose uh how much danger yes
yes they so you know if if you're if
you've got a lot of money like if you're
a billionaire you you can you can either
uh like
invest your money make sure that your
business is is is is uh secured it's you
know in its supply chain and right in
its customer base and and so on and and
then eventually uh sell your stake and
retire and and so on or you can decide
to go to Mars right yes and uh
even though you're a billionaire you
have to borrow a lot more money so that
so that you risk you risk being ruined
financially you risk
um death either for yourself or for your
volunteers right
um You you risk being criticized because
you're violating tradition right yes and
I don't you know
I I don't want to give people advice to
where to put themselves on them on the
spectrum of risk right and I'm I'm glad
when when people
uh behave optimistically
um but but I'm aware
that they are taking a risk and I I'm
ready for it to go wrong yes
yeah
that is true and yeah it's there's this
thing so one of my friends asked me to
ask you about about coercion like in the
general sense I think his specific
question was how do we avoid
self-coversion but I'm also thinking
about it in terms of like what you just
said in that you don't want to tell
someone else how much risk they should
take because then if it doesn't work out
then they'll they'll I mean it's you
know they'll blame you or you know it
wasn't really their informed decision
and it just yes it doesn't feel
um correct in some way I I I'm I'm kind
of projecting my feelings right but um
yeah I sense that you have the same
Instinct sort of yeah yeah
um well self-coercion like that's a big
issue that's like viewed viewed as
non-parochially as possible Right
self-coercion
covers
all unhappiness
wow so well
if you've got an incurable disease then
then self-coercion is not although it's
true that you're also self-coercing in
that case right you also need techniques
of Medical Science and so on and if the
knowledge might not be there you know
you're going to die right but but that's
that's not the typical human problem
especially nowadays right the the
typical human problem is is
psychological right
um yes and uh and therefore the typical
human and the happiness
which isn't caused by other humans
creativity which that still happens a
lot in the world yeah but the the
unhappiness which is not caused by the
creativity of other humans
chasing you trying trying to hurt you
right is caused by self-coercion and and
so
um
I don't know whether I can say very much
about this
um
one thing I can say is that
realizing this is
um liberating yes if you think if you're
in a situation where you're
um you're unhappy you're you you think
you're no good as a person you think you
can't succeed yeah and and you don't
realize that these prefixes you think
you think right right right that I just
said you what you the way you conceive
of it is that I'm no good as a person
I'm not going to succeed I haven't got
it what it takes and so on yes once you
realize that those are theories right
and there's nothing there's nothing
there's no Authority in theories they
might be true or false right they they
can all be criticized right and any
bad Theory can be improved by thinking
yes yes if you're prepared to expand
your horizon to include that possibility
right yeah I think it's accurate to say
that so when a person experiences
self-loathing so they they experience it
as negative just seemingly negative
feelings out of out of nowhere but like
there is a part of the self doing the
loathing of the rest of the cells yes
and the and the part that's doing the
loathing is the authority that has been
granted I mean it is some part of your
mind that you've granted Authority and
you should question those exactly you
should question that Authority as with
all authorities right yeah exactly
that's so true
that's very cool
yeah
um another thing I did I kind of just
wanted to share with you was I was
reading this part about
um how uh you pointed out that you know
so people often describe oh space is
um uninhabitable and hostile to humanity
and you pointed out that oh you know so
is Earth most of the in most of the
earth yes most times it's our style and
we have made it more habitable and uh
you know whether or not a space is
hostile is a function of the knowledge
that the person has or people have in
terms of how do you get water how do you
get power how do you get all those
things yes I wanted to share with you
that this seems to be also true for
cultural knowledge where so the example
I I recently encountered was um do you
know Trevor Noah
so Trevor Noah is this he's a South he's
a South African he's a South African
comedian and so he was he was born
um to
um to a black mom and a white dad in
South Africa when apartheid was
happening and his observation is very
interesting he observed that you know
because he's he doesn't fit into one of
the dominant groups that is around him
and so like people would not know how to
treat him and like they would be they
would treat him with hostility until he
can speak their language and the moment
he speaks their language suddenly he's
he has the cultural knowledge he he can
speak their their Shiba lefts right he
can speak
what they like and now they welcome him
and they love him and and it's a it's
you know that's why he's a comedian and
it's how he he charms people and stuff
and yeah so the ability to charm a
hostile audience is
is knowledge the same it feels to me
it's almost the same way like knowing
how to get water out of the ground for
example kind of uh
helps yes people survive
yeah which is such a again for me that
was a trip like really the and it you
know I when I was reading your book I
was thinking all of these things
seemingly different things they all fit
into this set they all they are like
branches on the same tree of
explanations and conjectures right
just like how do I get people to like me
or treat me fairly like what is it what
is their theory of who I am and how do I
and it's the same method of figuring
stuff out
which is which I find very uh by the way
sorry gone no no this one yeah you think
yeah well it's it's it's partly
uh it's a two-way street
to a large extent the the a culture
can be more or less amenable
to welcoming
deviant people right yes that's true
including foreigners uh people who don't
speak the language or people who who
don't understand the Customs or whatever
yeah
the I I think it's so
being welcoming to other
people culture Outsiders is part of
general rationality and so on and I
think it's it's not
it's not an accident that
the most successful
societies
are also the most tolerant ones or vice
versa right uh the ones who have somehow
solved the problem of how to
um accommodate
deviance right yeah yeah it's true
uh so well the other you know the big
example is the United States which had
its its um Melting Pot policy right um
but also Britain is is is uh is is
a tremendous mixture of different
cultures right
um and I don't know much about Singapore
but I think it is yes yeah very much so
yes uh it is I mean people have you know
that's that's friction but you know it's
I think it's a constructive
friction overall like uh it does feel
like um over the decades people have
gotten better at um kind of interfacing
with each other I mean you always hear
stories from people who don't get along
but in general I think uh you know just
having more people with different
backgrounds and different points of view
and different uh conceptualizations of
the issues that we face it seems to be a
net positive
and uh yeah it seems to be working on
generally yes I mean as I said it it's
it's definitely a net positive in itself
but the overall culture must make this
possible it must it must allow yeah the
benefit to be to be uh obtained a thing
that I'm very excited about is so I I
like to think of myself as someone who
who grew up on the internet and the
internet is almost kind of a you know
it's a wild and crazy chaotic space and
the interesting thing is there are new
people coming online who weren't online
not too long ago so for example I have
some friends in in different several
different countries in Africa in like uh
in Nigeria and Kenya in South Africa and
the interesting thing to me is um they
have so they have generally very young
and they are very optimistic about
politics I mean again like when I say
this now I can imagine someone showing
up in the comments saying like you know
they'll always be people who you know
like you said you pointed out very much
so that you know we will never solve all
problems because there'll always be new
problems and there'll always be
frictions and all those things but it's
it's so refreshing just to encounter
someone who you know it's it's kind of
new to the political process in a sense
like in terms of like um like being to
it like in your early 20s and new to
contemplating
um just how a better form of governance
maybe can lead to more like like which
is again related to what you're saying
about
um like cultural infrastructure which is
just it's it and and me from halfway
across the planet when I witness these
people being optimistic in contrast with
let's say uh people from maybe older
countries that have gotten a bit more
um pessimistic maybe like just the I
guess what I'm getting at is the the
simple presence of an optimistic person
just being optimistic without even
trying to persuade you of anything but
just being optimistic in of themselves
is so powerful to experience and like I
feel like reading your book I got some
of that as well just witnessing kind of
how you think right
thanks thanks it's a very nice thought
in general and and about my job thank
you yeah so I I am eager to eager to
share it with more of my friends because
I think that um
yeah it's it's it's so much better than
telling people what they should do
because if if like you know you you get
it right it's it's uh it's it's it's
like so the the like you mentioned the
the bucket analogy I think the the
different metaphor is the the fire
analogy have you heard that one like the
kind of uh I don't think so so I think
uh someone said
I can't remember who I feel like there's
multiple people who've been quoted this
and they said like education is not the
feeling of the of a bucket but the
lighting of a fire meaning like so you
ignite their curiosity and then they
will go on to yeah I mean
it's more like
trying to avoid putting out the fire and
obviously is already there yes they're
born with it
children will be unable to learn to
speak right you know yes you can't say
go put out the trash right
to a child who hasn't yet learned what
go and put and trash mean yes and and uh
yet nobody has to force their children
to learn to to what language yes yes
uh that the fire is already burning
um young children learn languages like
20 words per day at Peak yeah uh and
that plus the grammar plus the meanings
plus the connotations plus the cultural
significance of everything what you're
allowed to say what you're not allowed
to say they're learning all that along
with those 20 words per day astounding
yeah and and nobody's there's no
curriculum there are no standardized
tests or maybe they do have them now but
yeah yeah
um uh and and it it just happens and so
when you say you know Ed the role of the
teacher is to light that fire right
first the fire is already there the
first thing is don't put out the fire
right so it's yeah and uh it is it does
seem unfortunate that we haven't yet I
mean and yeah it's how you look at it
right so on one hand I think oh it's
unfortunate that we still seem to put
out a lot of fires but on the other hand
like the you know most of human history
was like that and we are seeing the
beginning of infinity right basically
yes which is which is exciting and um
yeah so I wanted to also ask you kind of
um I mean so I have some notes Here of
stuff to ask you one of the things I
wanted to ask was uh I want to know
what's it like inside your head which is
you know it's this super vague question
that's kind of not technical it's like a
it's not solvable but um
you know like I'll give it an
analogy which is so I play the guitar I
play music I'm not very good at it I'm
pretty decent at it but when I see a a
Virtual Soul like a real musical genius
performing I can see that
they don't think about what they're
doing like it's it's and I see that the
way their hands move I can tell that you
know they have a feeling and the feeling
is expressed through the fingers and
into through the sound waves and
emotions and whatever and I can I can
kind of approximate because like when I
practice I get glimpses of that I'm like
oh I kind of feel I feel like I'm I'm
getting across a message I have to think
a little bit and sometimes I have
moments of flow and I feel like oh okay
so that's what I can try to imagine what
it would be like to be so fluent that I
don't have to think at all and I'm just
flowing sort of and I you know when I
was reading when I was reading your just
even even your first chapter and I was
reading about like just um how you were
laying out kind of a history of
philosophy in a sense or history of
knowledge and and kind of the
misconceptions and how like uh you know
I I was I was surprised even at how how
confidently you were able to say things
like let me pick out a sentence like um
we never know any data before
interpreting it through theories I
underline that and I'm like oh that's
that's true like that sound like so when
I when I read a sentence like that I'm
like that's that's an assertion and then
I read it I'm like thinking about it I'm
like that makes sense though and then I
have to process it for a while I'm like
yeah that's true and it's it's it's so
interesting to
you know so I guess I'm curious about
your your your experience as a thinker
as a writer as a person who makes a
trenches right or makes conjectures and
um you know I just I just read this this
Paul Graham essay very recently where he
was talking about how essayists seem
very confident but the reason that
they're confident is not kind of uh born
out of like false Bluster but basically
because they've thought about it a lot
and they've kind of like they've they've
checked out all the possible ways in
which they might be wrong and then they
remove those wrongs and so by the time
they publish it what you see is that one
sentence but what you don't see is all
the what if they were wrong what if like
all the questioning and I kind of want
to hear you hear your experience with
that like with conjectures and criticism
and like your own personal experience
like uh you know I guess where I would
start is do you remember your earliest
questions as a child even like what were
your
how did you start
um I I do remember some early questions
uh I don't know whether they are
very Illuminating by the way there's a
there's a theory of the Mind Right of
Consciousness and so on which which is
which highlights
self-awareness in fact some people some
people even use self-awareness as as the
definition of of Consciousness and and
so on and then they they get very
surprised when a dolphin can recognize
its own
um reflection in a mirror yeah they're
like oh my God the dolphins dolphins are
the same as we do right
um I don't think
I don't think that thinking about one's
thinking
is often very helpful I mean there are
special situations where it is but but I
think this thing about being in the flow
that you mentioned right that happens
when you are thinking about the subject
the music or the problem right or uh
whatever it is you're thinking about yes
that is occupying your Consciousness and
you are not there right yes yes
so that's that's so that's so funny yeah
that's true
um so and I think
um
children uh
tend to be like that and unless they're
brought up against
a thing that that forces them to think
about themselves so I don't know what's
uh one of the first things I remember is
um
I had just been taught
I I had previously been taught to count
up to ten and uh this was in nursery
school and and well then we taught how
to how to go up to a hundred right and I
remember being driven home in the car
and in the car thinking
does this go on forever
or not that's wonderful and of course
you know a lot of mathematicians have
thought that question and so I didn't
solve it
I remember thinking about it and and uh
then I I
I well I don't maybe I did solve it I I
came to the conclusion the answer is yes
it does go on forever but I didn't have
really an argument about that I suppose
it was just that
having seen how you could go from 10 to
I didn't see how that could stop right
why the same thing but
um apparently uh Archimedes
um never quite dared to say oh yeah I
read that I read I read the part where
you mentioned that he seemed to not want
to universalize
yes right with the notation and yes we
invented these bigger and bigger huge
numbers but it was always by this ad hoc
parochial method yeah which could have
been extended infinitely but it just
didn't
yeah it's um
yeah so I yeah I think I say in the book
I I think he may have uh been
um
wanting a an authoritative uh permission
right from the culture or something
right yeah and the culture did not like
um that kind of infinity oh this is
beautiful I I I remember so you know I'm
a huge uh Richard Feynman fan as well
and uh I was I was almost shocked a
little bit when I saw that that you
pointed out that he Feynman made a
mistake when he was describing kind of
uh like the future of physics and that
you know and like one of Finance core
this kind of like the phrase that's
tattooed in my brain is you know we
should not the first rule is you
shouldn't fool yourself and you're the
easiest person to fool right he says
that and then he goes on to make that
kind of almost
casual mistake that's such a gigantic
mistake in a sense and then I find
myself I'm writing in the margins oh no
like if Feynman himself was not able to
resist that like what chance to do I
have but you know it's a
it was it was something just because he
made a mistake doesn't mean he wasn't
able to resist it and maybe you know all
fireman's uh uh uh works are really just
uh transcripts of stuff he said right
how do you know that that he didn't
change his mind the next day that's true
that's that's true yeah so we shouldn't
be trying to not make mistakes right we
should be making interesting mistakes
and absolutely make more and more new
and more interesting mistakes and I I
love the way you put that um what if we
call theories misconceptions right
because everything is a misconception
and we just have slightly better and
better misconceptions
yes yeah that is that is something
that's very cool and better problems
yeah
so what what would you say is the the
problem on your mind right now when
you're in the shower or when you're
going about are you you're working on a
new book or
uh yes uh I am uh I'm I'm working on the
like what will be the third in the
trilogy nice
um
it uh I mean I don't know how long it's
going to take it always takes longer
than I think oh yeah my previous two
books took a hell of a lot longer than I
thought so you know I can't tell right
when we'll be finished but
um it will
talk more about
issues of the mind and how the mind
works I mean you know we don't know how
the mind works but right interest rising
in Psychology and how psychology is
connected to physics and computation and
and there'll be stuff about Constructors
and and so on other things that I have
thought about since then uh all those
things raise fascinating problems like
you know Constructors for example
there's the technical theory of them
which is very challenging and then
there's the applications the universal
Constructor and then there's what the
Constructor tells us what constructive
theory tells us about knowledge and so
on and then how it will affect thick how
the universal Constructor will affect
the economy right and and how can
whether Constructor Theory will be at
all useful in making real Constructors
right and so on yeah
go ahead uh like for my layperson
friends and for me actually uh how how
would you describe what a universal
Constructor is just a casually
well a universal Constructor the the
idea I think was invented by John Von
Neumann back in the 1940s or something
it it is a a machine you could say a
robot all right which can be programmed
so it's a programmable robot right that
can be programmed to convert some stuff
into some other stuff that's right so it
can convert let's say a pile of um metal
uh and plastic into a car right that
that would be an example of a construct
programmable Constructor it's important
programmable is is important here
because you can just have a Constructor
as well but the real power of the Theory
comes with programmable Constructors and
then a universal Constructor which is a
programmable Constructor right that can
convert anything into anything that's
permitted by the where the transition is
permitted by the laws of physics right
so if it's if the laws of physics allow
it it can do it yeah and usually a
universal Constructor would do an
arbitrary task by first building another
Constructor which builds another
Constructor right right as um
this book by Larry Niven where he where
he he describes this as
the problem of
how to build the tools to make the tools
to make the tools that's right
interesting yeah oh but just randomly
remember that uh so my wife was in China
for like several years ago for some
Trade Fair and like this they have these
massive trade fairs where they do sell
the huge like robot Factory robots that
make the robots that make other things
and it's just like she was she was
describing her sense of like like how
her mind was blown when you know you see
the objects that you you like you see a
can of soup and you're like oh I wonder
how the can of soup was made and you
visualize oh it's in the factory the
cans are coming up but you don't think
you don't naturally think what made the
thing that makes the cans of soup right
and I guess a universal Constructor
would be able to produce those things at
at will for like a space Colony or
something and just whatever is required
right from scratch that's the thing when
you get to a universal Constructor you
have this jump to universality right
where suddenly the repertoire instead of
being a large repertoire like you know
for example a giant machine that makes
robots right you can program it like a
different kind of robot but it'll make
it out of it won't go and mine the right
the raw materials yeah uh and so on but
a universal Constructor will be able to
do that it will it will be able you know
if necessary it'll be it'll be able to
build a rocket which will go to an
asteroid which will mine the rare
Elements which will bring them back you
know and so on whatever and the thing is
the difficulty of doing a particular
task then becomes
only once you've got a universal
construction the only difficulty is to
write the program
right so everything becomes programming
right right and then once once everyone
is once everyone is very skilled at
programming then it's what you can
imagine to be the most yes active use of
yeah well I I don't think you can you
can be infinitely skilled I mean there's
they'll there will always be scope for
more and more and more skills yeah in
the program more and more knowledge yeah
how to Pro how to solve different
manufacturing tasks but when you've
written a program for the universal
Constructor that's it whether you want
one of the item or a trillion as long as
you own the raw materials you know
if you program it to steal someone
else's raw materials they'll be trouble
right if you own that asteroid then
there is once you've programmed how to
make one of the objects right you've
programmed how to make any number so we
we have a our intuition about
what manufacturing is
we'll have to change oh for sure yeah up
to up to the time of the universal
Constructor
wanting more of something always meant
more effort right more human effort
right
um that's it's you you had to have the
theoretical knowledge as well you you as
well the program you know how to do a
thing but it always required human
effort as well once there's a universal
Constructor right then making one is the
same as making a million yeah uh and and
this will completely change the nature
of the economy in ways that we totally
can't predict at the moment but it can
be amazing right what I find myself
thinking is what you're describing so if
if we if we remove the universal aspect
of the Constructor like um you know the
present day status quo like to someone
from 20 000 years ago like our our
current circumstances would seem like a
very Grand Constructor made up of
organizations and people and and you
know Supply chains and you know you put
in an order and then once once we had um
emails for example like so before emails
and after emails like the the human
scale Constructor suddenly had like a a
big leap forward like suddenly you can
put in orders quicker and yeah so this
sounds like basically Singularity stuff
right like it gets to the point where
yeah I don't actually believe in the
singularity but but it doesn't matter
exponential growth yeah is is
mind-boggling enough right yeah
functionally yeah yeah even even I think
there's a quote that said something like
was it from you I'm just reading your
book so that's probably you said that
people yeah it was you people who can't
imagine uh what they would do if more
than two times their income like you
kind of know what you would do if you
had twice a salary that's a quote from
David Friedman actually right and then
if if you had 10 times your income you
would have to fundamentally reimagine
what you yes you would do right it's not
just like yeah so if if I doubled my
income yeah I would renovate my kitchen
I would you know I have stuff I have
stuff in my mind but if I had like 10
like 100 times more I have to oh my God
like what am I going I have to
re-conceptualize everything
yes it might not be so good yeah yeah
that's true that's true that's true
it can be a cursed
well hmm that's actually that's actually
an interesting I wonder if I wonder if
there are parallels between that and
when we go all the way back to when
we're talking about like fire and new
technology where because in both cases
you know so whether it's more money or
or new knowledge like having new it's
like having the new ability to do
something you couldn't do before and
like how do you it's it's dangerous I
guess to figure out what's going to
happen or like now you may have made
yourself a target a Target in some way
right
a lot of people if you got there by
solving problems that you had then you
will already have the kind of mental
infrastructure to to know what to do
with the 100 times the income right
that's right yeah we've got that 100
times the income for a reason it's
because you have a project in it you
know and so on right uh but but
if if you if you're not if if you like
if you inherited it yeah uh if you if
you inherited uh more money than you
know what to do with yeah then it's
dangerous I mean right people do get
unhappy from things that sometimes they
get happy right but it's volatile they
get unhappy yeah yeah so yeah it's
volatile right yeah yeah yeah it's
unpredictable and by the way I think
uh this is maybe going off the tangent
but I I read recently about about uh
Silicon Valley billionaires keeping
their children away from Tech I I and
you know not letting them have mobile
phones and that kind of thing I I think
that's a terrible idea one of the great
difficulties of being rich and having
children right is is
um bringing the children onto the
on-ramp of how to live right happily
with a lot of money they might be able
to do it because as I said they got
there for a reason ah the children need
help that's true and but the the
absolute opposite of giving them help is
keeping them away from it keeping them
away on the the the the money the
technology the the song they
uh and you know I I think um in the past
when there have been very rich people
and sometimes there have been dynasties
of rich people like you know the
Rothschilds or or or yeah royal family a
lot of time yeah uh well no that's
different because they were solving a
different kind of problem but if we just
talk about people in in uh wealthy
industrialized in the economy right
self-made billionaires or whatever okay
sometimes the dynasty thing worked but
more often
The Offspring of the very rich person
didn't know what to do
they couldn't continue the rich person's
work nor could they do something new
right and so this is The Stereotype of
them like wasting their money and then
the the generation after that is back to
normal interesting
um uh and and you know if you wanted to
if you I think you know far be it from
me to tell people what to do right but I
I think that if you're a super rich
person then you have children
um
one of the major challenges facing you
is to give your children the means of
being rich and happy which means being
rich and creative right right and being
being rich
um
can if you don't have that knowledge if
if you're not creative it can make you
kind of not able to to make progress it
doesn't look like a you know poor person
who's unable to be creative will stop
yeah but a rich kid who is unable to
creative be creative will just be
unhappy right right
that is an interesting way of framing it
I like yeah that's that's interesting
and it's it's it's slightly surprising
that this isn't a solved problem in a
way like you know like uh when you when
you so they have like financial planners
and stuff right when you make that much
money people come to you if uh you know
here's how you manage like somebody
should be okay and here's like the
concerns for people with this amount of
net worth like uh you know I'm sure they
have like private tutors and stuff like
for their yeah well yes but the trouble
is they have conventional educational
theories
like a theory of the mind oh yeah and so
they will think of the problem in
completely the wrong terms
um that's true wow I like how quickly
you that that was obvious to you that's
true yeah that makes sense
that is unfortunate because like you
said way earlier on you know if we had
creative wealthy people then they are
they would be well positioned to make a
accelerate us towards uh
right
that is it and we do have some luckily
yeah but
but they are they are a a an enormous
public good and and we could do it a lot
more
that's true that is interesting
wow that's uh that's a lot to think
about that is uh you know I think the
one of the last things that I I haven't
gotten to ask you about yet that's in my
notes is
um about the idea of of rational versus
and irrational memes which uh yes let me
try anti-rational I like to say yeah
yeah so let me try and make sure
yeah let me let me try and make sure
that I I understand it properly so um my
and I'm now I'm going from memory here
but so an anti-rational meme is
something that uh it's an idea that's
sticky meaning that people people who
receive that idea keep it and it makes
them act not in their interests is that
would would you correct so both rational
and anti-rational means by being memes
memes means that they're sticky that's
already in the in the thing rational and
anti-rational memes achieve their
stickiness by kind of opposite methods
uh um the the the anti-rational memes
achieve their stickiness by
um
uh depriving the the holder of the
ability to criticize them
um so there's a kind of authority
yes yes that's right it sets up an
authority but it sets up an un uh an
entrenched Authority so that so that
thoughts that go along the in the
direction of
um maybe I should behave differently
always gets stuck you'll always get
diverted into no I can't know that's bad
no no I I'm I'm a bad but I would be a
bad person or whatever that you know I
will go to hell right um that kind of
thought and and because the thoughts get
diverted into that kind of Channel
um they can't critics get round to
criticizing the thing that says uh do do
this behave in this way or don't behave
in this way whatever the meme says the
so and that that's how and of course
being a meme it it has to
among other things
not only does it prevent you from
criticizing but it it compels you to
install the meme into other people
ah yes yeah so otherwise it wouldn't be
a meme if it was just in if it was just
in one mind it would just be a hang up
right um right to be a meme it's got to
be transferable to other people and
usually we only call something a meme if
it's readily transferable into lots of
other people right
um
the rational mean
is is the opposite it's one that
survives criticism not disables
criticism right it's one which thrives
in a critical environment because as it
were because it's true because it's
useful so people adopt it because they
can improve their lives by by
using that idea or acting on that
behavior or you know whatever so so
uh well I've interrupted you but no no
um this is what I want to understand so
um so the difference between anti-ration
I mean so okay so anti-rational means
have that kind of um self protective
mechanism the meme has a protective
mechanism and it spreads whereas the
rational meme is welcomes criticism
because and I guess the so the thing
about the rational meme is it has a
certain proof of work in a way there's
something within that Meme that persists
despite criticism right so it has to be
I mean yes like and I think you
mentioned something about
it's not even despite criticism the
criticism
to correct the errors otherwise that
there if if you just try to copy a meme
blindly right without criticism right
then
mistakes will will happen yeah yeah and
and eventually it it will not be the
same mean if if the meme is uh
if a rational meme
reproduces Faithfully because it's being
criticized uh and the the the criticism
itself is what makes the meme sticky as
you put it right right
it's what makes it unchanged otherwise
it would gradually change and for an
anti-rational meme what makes it sticky
is that the criticism is disabled
right and so anti-rational memes do
evolve by kind of dumb evolution in the
same way that genes evolve hmm
anti-rational memes do not stay the same
for thousands of generations right and
that's right what you just described
it's almost intrinsically cause for
optimism right because dumb
something that evolves through dumb
replication should not be I mean I don't
know it feels it feels I mean I I need
to I'm sure if you work out the math in
a way or like you know you game it out
yes there might be some circumstances
where maybe the anti-rational means
overpower the rational means by sheer
volume maybe but
if as long as the anti-rational memes
survive like eventually they will they
should win out you know it feels it
feels like a rational meme survive yes
yes right yeah that's that's uh yeah
that's reminding me of how um I once had
a funny thought which is that a lot of
people play act their optimism meaning
they aren't fundamentally optimistic or
they haven't like con thought about
whether or not they're really optimistic
it's just that they feel that being
pessimistic is not nice like socially
and so they feel like uh I should carry
I should say optimistic sounding things
like oh you should you should be hopeful
for the future but you don't really
believe in it it's not true it's not
it's not grounded in honest belief and
it's always funny to encounter these
things where oh like if that's true then
you should be optimistic it's just it's
like it's this therefore that it's like
logical
thing
have you encountered that like a kind of
a if you're talking to somebody and then
you realize that they're not actually
optimistic until
I I'm not sure whether I have either way
I think it's much more common for people
to be cynical right
um in other words uh artificial
pessimism kind of right they're not
really pessimistic that they just like
The Stance
right I guess certain politicians have
an artificial optimism
um yeah and because in that context
uh cynicism is
um
usually not not beneficial to a
politician sometimes they are you know
if you if you have a prophets of Doom
they they can be cynical and and be
popular because of it I don't know
that's interesting
wow okay I think I have exhausted most
of my of my questions for you and uh
I wonder if there's any anything that I
can kind of get have like a like
overarching theme I guess I guess the
big picture thing I wanted to talk to
you about was optimism with and uh
parochialism
and yeah I feel like we've addressed
those things
um I guess what what like like if I can
get you to kind of uh have like a
closing
remarks on parochialism in the world and
uh you know like for whoever watches but
like what's like your
yeah well like I said we we
let's not put ourselves in the position
of you know telling people not to be
parochial or yeah or whatever yeah it
shouldn't or even telling people that
it's okay not to be parochial or
whatever yeah yeah
I I I'm just I am encouraged by this
conversation
yeah that is the beginning right you
like talking to people
coming from different
intellectual directions I forget how you
put it you put it very nicely yeah we
have different I think contacts you and
I seem to be coming from the same
intellectual Direction
so that's also sometimes right trying to
be yeah trying to be rigorous trying to
be honest trying to be correct trying to
criticize
uh-huh yeah yeah that that's a very
happy thing for me to hear and it's a
it's a wonderful thing to to close on I
think uh I would encourage everyone who
watches this whether it's on YouTube or
whatever to check out uh the beginning
of infinity it's a great book and uh
yeah thank you David
right and I will look forward to your
next one when it when you're eventually
done with it uh thanks